hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye when you look at like the fall
of the Soviet Union or you look at the
failure of like socialist or communist
regimes I don't know if the issue there
was so much redistribution that was one
of many issues I don't think it was an
issue at all actually I was what do you
mean redistribution wasn't an issue what
the hell do you think they did to the
Kola if you believe climate models or if
you believe that we're heading in a
certain direction I don't believe any of
those presumptions people keep saying
but we just got another one of the
hottest years on record That's a classic
leftist argument why wouldn't Putin why
wouldn't Gan pink why wouldn't anybody
else in the world call this out it was
as horrible as it was there are plenty
of people attempting to call no you
really think that you're in a position
to evaluate the scientific credibility
of the trials for the vaccines do
you hello everyone I'm here today
talking to Steph banel known
professionally and online as Destiny
he's an American streamer
debater and political commentator he
really came to my attention I would say
as a consequence of the discussion he
had with Ben Shapiro and Lex fredman and
I decided to talk to him not least
because it's not that easy to bring
people who are identified at least to
some degree with the political beliefs
on the left into a studio where I can
actually have a conversation with them
I've tried that more often than you
might think and it happens now and then
but not very often so today we talk a
lot about
well the differences between the left
and the right and the dangers of
political ideology per se and the use of
power as opposed to invitation and all
sorts of
other heated often heated and
contentious issues and so you're welcome
to join us and um I was happy to have
the opportunity to do this so I guess we
might as well start by letting the
people who don't know who you are get to
know who you are with a little bit more
precision
so why have you become known and and how
has that developed it's a pretty broad
question um I think I started streaming
around 15 years ago when it wasn't
really a thing yet there were a few
people that did it uh I started early on
I was a well I guess back then you
weren't a professional gamer yet because
the game had just started to come out
but there was a game called Starcraft 2
and I screamed myself playing that game
I was a pretty good player was pretty
entertaining to watch and then I kind of
grew uh over I guess maybe the next
seven years uh just streaming that
people would watch streaming on YouTube
um well back then I started on a website
called live stream then I switched to
Ustream then I switched to a site called
Justin TV and then that turned into
twitch.tv uh so after streaming there
for like s or eight years I was a
semi-professional Starcraft 2 gamer that
game kind of came and went but I had a
lot of other interests around 2016 I
started to get more involved into the
world of politics it's kind of a left
leaning figure uh because my background
on like Esports and internet gaming and
internet trash talk I got I had more of
a kind of like a combative attitude and
that was kind of rare for left leaning
people at the time so it's basically
where my early political popularity came
from I think from like 2016 to 2018 was
debating right-wing people so was there
a game likee element to the debating do
you think and and is that part of is
that part of why that morphing made
sense no I wouldn't say so I mean if you
if you get really reductionist
everything in life is kind of a game but
that's not very satisfying uh I think I
grew up like very argumentative my mom
is from Cuba so my family was like very
conservative and then I grew up like
listening to the news all day listening
to my mom's political opinions all day
and then I argued with kids in high
school and everything and I've always
been kind of like an argumentative type
A aggressive personality so I think that
probably lent itself well to the
political stuff in 2016 yeah was that
useful in
gaming um that that personality in some
ways yeah and some ways no um I don't
know directly for the games itself I
don't know how much it necessarily
mattered uh but for all the peripheral
stuff in some ways it was really
beneficial I could kind of like cut out
my own path and I could be very unique
and I could kind of be on my own in some
ways it was very detrimental uh I'm very
I can be very difficult to get along
with and I'm very much kind of like I
want to do this thing and if you try to
tell me what to do I don't want to have
like a sponsor or a team or anybody kind
of with a leash on me so yeah I guess it
worked out it's interesting because that
the temperamental proclivity that you're
describing that's associated with low
agreeableness and generally well and
that's more combative it's more stubborn
it's more implacable it's more
competitive the downside is that it's
more skeptical it's it can be more
cynical it can be less Cooperative but
generally a temperament like that is
associated with is not associated with
political belief on the left because the
leftists tend to be characterized by um
higher levels of compassion and that's
low agreeableness so you know that
element of your temperament at least is
quite masculine and then a lot of the
ideology that characterizes the modern
left has a much more temperamentally
feminine nature so so all right so why
do you think the shift from your
popularity to political commentary
worked and you said that started about
2016 and why do you think that that
shift happened for you like in terms of
your interest I think I've always been
interested in a lot of things like I
grew up with a very strong political
bend it was conservative until I got
into my streaming years probably five or
six years into streaming I slowly kind
of started to shift to the left um I
would say that
uh I guess in around around 2016 when I
saw all of the conversations going on
with the election and all the issues
being talked about I just I felt like
the conversations were very low quality
and in my naivity I thought that maybe I
could come in and boost the quality at
least in like my little corner of the
internet to have better conversations
about what was going on and so that was
my basically my injection Point into of
that was yeah fting about those
political issues and then arguing with
people about them doing research and
reading and all of that yeah and so did
you do that by video to begin with as
well yeah it was all streaming yeah it
was all streaming and so you I presume
you built an audience among the people
who were following you as a gamer first
and then that started to expand is that
correct basically yeah with without
getting too much into like the business
or streaming side of things basically um
actually this probably carries over to
to basically to all media I would
imagine is you've got people that will
watch you for special events uh so maybe
you're like a commentator of the Super
Bowl or maybe you're hosting like a
really huge event then you've got people
who will watch you every time you're
participating in your area of expertise
so for me that's like a particular game
I might be playing um it might be when
you're on like a particular show or
something that people watch you for and
then the fundamental fan like the best
fan that you're converting to the lowest
and most loyal uh viewer I guess is
somebody that's watching you basically
no matter what you're doing and these
are the people that will follow you from
area to area and I think because of the
way I did game and I talked about a lot
of other stuff whether it was politics
science current events whatever I had a
lot of loyal fans that kind of followed
me wherever I went so quite a few of
stablished the reputation so how would
you characterize your reach now how
would you quantify
it uh I think my can you be more precise
how many people are how many people are
watching your a typical video that you
might produce and and what are you doing
for subscribers Say on YouTube and total
any idea about total reach yeah well I
mean I guess my subscribers on YouTube I
around I think think now it's around
770,000 on my main Channel I think I
probably do between all three channels I
think around 15 to 20 million views a
month um and then I live stream to
anywhere from 5 to 15,000 concurrent
viewers a day for hopefully around eight
hours a day uh yeah okay okay so you
have quite a substantial reach and so
you said that initially you were more
conservative leaning but that changed
what okay what did it mean that you were
more conser ative leaning and how did
that how and why did that change uh when
I say I was conservative leaning and I
was writing uh articles for my school
newspaper defending George Bush in the
Iraq War uh I was like very much like um
I don't I think it's like an insult now
what people say like neocon but I was
like very much like a conservative a
bush era conservative uh so supported
big business supported um traditional
all of the conservative I guess like
foreign policy you know hawkish policy
uh for whatever that meant as like a 14
15y old um right was the whole elen
Gonzalez in uh incident that was very
big for uh Cuban Americans where um
there was a Cuban boy that tried to come
to the United States with several other
people and his mother and their raft I
guess crashed or something happened I
think his mom died and some other people
died and there was a huge debate on
whether or not to send him back to Cuba
and Clinton ended up sending it back to
Cuba and I know that my mom was super
irritated and all that um to say the
least and then but once they hit College
I think I supported Ron Paul in 200
would have been 2008 uh so was a big Ron
Paul libertarian uh guy in high school
when I went from I went to a Catholic
Jesuit High School and I kind of became
atheist in that process I started
reading Ein Rand uh so I was very very
very very very
conservative
um on the libertarian end it sounds yeah
I would say so yeah initially on the
like that makes more sense in
relationship to your temperament
libertarian yeah yeah yeah initially it
was like Christian conservative and then
it became like libertarian conservative
um without my life kind of took like a
wacky path and then as I I started
working I kind of had to drop out of
school I was working and then I got into
streaming and once I started streaming I
had a son basically around the first
year I started streaming uh as I started
to go through life and I went from kind
of being in this like Working Poor
position to making a lot of money uh
especially through the lens of my child
I saw how different life was when I had
more money versus less and I guess like
the um the differences between what was
available to me and then my child as I
made more money uh while I was really
wealthy versus not as wealthy it kind of
started to change the way that I I guess
you got more attuned to the consequences
of inequality
isas it yeah okay and so that okay how
did that lead you to develop more
sympathy for left leaning ideas
particularly I guess the my my core
beliefs have never really changed but I
think the way that those uh become
applied kind of change uh so much the
same way that uh you might think that
everybody deserves a shot to go to
school and have an education that might
be like a core belief where as a
Libertarian or conservative I might
think that as long as a school is
available everybody's got the
opportunity to go and study but maybe
now as like a liberal or Progressive or
whatever you'd call me I might say okay
well we need to make sure that there's
enough you know maybe like food in the
household or household or some kind of
funding program to make sure the kid can
actually go to school and study
basically so like the the the core Drive
is the same but I think the applied the
the applied principle ends up changing a
bit based on what is your concern
essentially something like um the
observation that if people are breed
enough of substance let's say that it's
difficult for them to take advantage of
equal opportunities even if they are
presented to them let's say yeah
essentially yeah and and you're you you
have some belief and correct me if I'm
wrong you have some belief that there is
room for State intervention I at the
level of basic provision to make those
opportunities more manifest yeah to
varying degrees yeah okay okay how okay
so let let let's let's start talking
more broadly then on the political side
so how would you characterize the
difference in your opinion between the
left and the conservative political
viewpoints umof uh on a on a very very
very broad level
um if there's some I would say if
there's some like good good world that
we're all aiming for I think people on
the left uh seem to think that a a
collection of taxes from a large
population that goes into a government
that's able to precisely kind of dull
out uh where that tax money goes uh
you're basically able to take the
problems of society you're able to
scrape off hopefully a a not super
significant amount of money from people
that are that can afford to give a lot
of and then through government programs
and redistribution you target that uh
that those taxes essentially to people
that kind of need whatever bare minimum
to take advantage opportun deci yeah and
then for on the conservative end um I
guess a conservative would generally
think that why would the government take
my money I think from a community point
of view through churches through
Community Action through families we can
better allocate our own dollars to our
own friends and family to help them and
give them the things that they need so
that they can better participate in and
thrive in society
basically okay so one of the things that
I've always found a mystery I I think
there's an equal mystery on the left and
on the right in this regard is that the
more conservative types tend to be very
skeptical of big government and the
leftist types tend to be more skeptical
of big
corporations right well you okay so
following through the logic that you
just laid out you made the suggestion
that one of the things that
characterizes people on the left is the
belief that government can act as a
agent of distrib can and should act as
an agent of distribution okay a
potential problem for that is the
gigantism of the government that does
that now the conservatives are skeptical
of that gigantism and likewise the
Liberals the progressives in particular
we'll call them progressives um are
skeptical of the reach of gigantic
corporations and I've always seen a
commonality in those two in that both of
them are skeptical of
gigantism and so one of the things that
I concerned about generally speaking
with regard to the potential for the
rise of tyranny is the emergence of of
Giants and one potential problem with
the view that the government can and
should act as an agent of redistribution
is that there is an incentive put in
place two kinds of incentives number one
a major league incentive towards
gigantism and tyranny and number two an
incentive for psychopaths who use comp
passion to justify their grip on power
to take money and to claim that they're
doing good and I see that happening
everywhere now in the name of
particularly in the name of compassion
it's one of the things that's made me
very skeptical in particular about the
left and at least about the progressive
edge of the left so I'm curious about
what you think about those two first of
all it's it's a paradox to me that the
conservatives and the leftists face off
each other with regard to their concern
about different forms of gigantism and
don't seem to notice that the thing that
unites them is some antipathy this is
especially true for the Libertarians
some antipathy towards gigantic
structures per se and so then I would
say with regards to your antithesis
between liberalism and conservatives the
conservatives are pointing to the fact
that there are intermediary forms of
distribution that can be utilized to
solve the social problems that you're
describing that don't bring with them
the Associated problem of gigantism and
like this is a it's been shocking to me
to watch the left especially in the last
six years Ally itself for example with
pharmaceutical companies which was
something I'd never saw never thought I
would see in my lifetime I mean for for
decades the only gigantic corporations
the left was more skeptical of than the
fossil fuel companies were the
pharmaceutical companies and that all
seemed to vanish overnight around the
covid time so I know the story that's a
lot of things to throw at you but it
sort of outlines the territory that we
could probably investigate productively
yeah so a couple things I would say that
the current political landscape we have
I think is less uh I understand the the
concept of conservative supporting
corporations and liberal support uh
supporting like large government I think
today the Divide we're starting to see
more and more is more of like a populist
uh anti-populist rise or even like
institutional or anti-institutional rise
so for instance I think conservative
city in the United States are largely
characterized with uh I would say with
populism uh and that they're supporting
like certain figures namely right now
Donald Trump who they think alone can
kind of like lead them against the
corrupt institutions uh be them
corporate or government I feel like I
feel like most conservatives today are
not as trustful of big corporations as
they were back in like the bush era
where we would you know conservatives
would Champion you know big corations I
think that's right yeah um I a strange
because it makes the modern
conservatives a lot more like the 60s
leftists potentially yeah um I mean that
brings us into the issue too of whether
the Left Right divide is actually a
reasonable way of construing the current
political landscape at all and I'm not
sure it is but right now it kind of is
but only because so many conservatives
are following Trump so like your
populist anti-populist thing kind of
maps on kind of cleanly to the left and
right it doesn't work with progressives
though or the farle because they're also
anti-large everything so in a surprising
way on very very farle people you might
find them having a bit more in common
with kind of like a mega Trump supporter
uh than like a center left liberal so
for instance like both of these groups
of people on the very far left will be
very doish on foreign policy probably a
little bit more isolationist they're not
a big fan of like a ton of immigration
or a ton of trade with other countries
uh they might think that there's a lot
of institutional capture of both
government and corporations so both all
of the Mega supporters and the far farle
might think that corporations don't have
our best interest at heart and the
government is corrupt and captur by
lobbyists like yeah you'll see a lot of
overlap there right um I think that
sometimes uh there's a couple things one
uh this is something I feel like I've
discovered people have no principles uh
I think that people are largely Guided
by whatever is kind of satisfying them
or making them feel good at the time I
think that's a really important thing to
understand because people's beliefs will
seem to change at random if you're
trying to uh imagine that a belief is
coming from some underlying principle or
is governed by some internal uh you know
like moral or reasonable code or
whatever I think generally there are
large social groups and people kind of
follow them along from thing to thing
which is why you end up in strange
worlds sometimes where uh you know like
the the position on vaccines and being
an antivaxer might have been seen as
something you know 10 years ago as kind
of like a hippie leftist and now maybe
it's more like a conservative or uh it's
Associated more with like Mega Trump
supporters or whatever I think as a
result of how the social groups move
around um when it comes to the you
mentioned this like gigantism thing
that's another I'm not sure if people
actually care about gigantism or if
they're using it as a proxy for other
things that they don't like like I could
totally imagine a I care about it sure
yeah you might yeah sorry just in
general that's okay um cuz like I could
imagine somebody saying that like they
don't trust like a large government they
think there's too much uh you know prone
to tyranny or something like that but
also be supportive of an institution
like the Catholic Church which is
literally you know one guy who has a
direct to they can't tax um well I mean
there and they don't have a military and
they can't conscript you and they can't
throw you in jail that is true yeah I
mean well those are major those are
major and significant I mean I get I get
the overlap don't get me wrong sure but
I'm saying like even if you had a local
government like a local like if you had
a state government or a tribe usually
they've got some form of enacting
punishment it'll be sometimes more
brutal but they can throw you in jail uh
conscription hasn't existed in the US
since the Vietnam War um I mean yeah
yeah true yeah yeah true um so yeah I
think that um I guess when I look at so
this is so let's go back well let's go
back to to the redistribution issue I
mean we pay 65% of our income at say
upper middle class middle class to upper
middle class level in Canada it isn't
obvious to me at all that that money is
well used in fact quite the contrary in
my country now um our citizens make 60%
of they produce 60% of what you produce
in the US that's plummeted over the last
20 years as state intervention has
increased I'm not convinced that the
claim
that the interests of people who lack
opportunity are best served by state
intervention and there's there's a
couple of reasons for that I mean first
of all I'm aware of the relationship
between inequality and social problem
there's a very well-developed literature
on that and it it essentially shows that
the more arbitrary the the the broader
the reach of inequality in in a
political institution of Any Given size
the more social unrest so we're PE where
all people are poor there isn't much
social unrest and where all people are
rich there isn't much social unrest but
when there's a big gap between the two
there's plenty and that's mostly driven
by disaffected young men who aren't very
happy that they can't climb the
hierarchy there are barriers in their
way and so there is reason to amarate
relative poverty the problem with that
to some degree is that most attempts to
ameliorate relative poverty tend to
increase absolute poverty and they do it
dramatically and the only solution that
we've ever been able to develop to that
is something approximating a free market
system I wouldn't call it a capitalist
system because I think that's capture of
the terminology by the radical leftists
it's a free exchange system and the
price you pay for a free exchange system
is you still have inequality but the
advantage you gain is that the absolute
levels of privation plummet and I think
the data on that are I think they're
absolutely conclusive especially and
that's been especially demonstrated in
the radical decrease in rates of poverty
since the collapse of the Soviet Union
in 1989 because we've lifted more people
out of poverty in the last four decades
than we had in the entire course of
human history up to that date and that's
not least because the statist
interventionist types who argued for a
radical state sponsored redistribution
lost the Cold War right and that freed
up after Africa to some degree and
certainly the Southeast Asian countries
to pursue something like a free trade
economy and that instantly even that
instantly made them Rich even China so
well
so that's an argument let's say on the
side of free exchange but it's also an
argument two-fold argument pointing out
how we amarate absolute poverty which it
should be a concern for leftists but
doesn't seem to be anymore by the way
and also an argument for the maintenance
of a necessary inequality like I'm not
sure that inequality can be decreased
Beyond a certain degree without that
decrease causing other serious problems
and we can talk about that but but it's
a complicated problem yeah let for one
point of clarification when you say
leftist what do you mean by that well we
I was going with your definition like
essentially that the this the core idea
being something like the the central
problem being one of relative inequality
and distribution of resources and the
central solution to that being something
like state sponsored economic
intervention I mean there's other ways
we could Define left or right and we do
that but but I'll stick with the one
that you brought forward to begin with
gotcha gotcha okay I I only want to be
clear on that because um uh because
people get mad if I call myself fpst um
often times online or in especially in
Europe or worldwide leftists will uh
refer exclusively to like socialists or
communists and anybody to the right of
that would be considered like a liberal
if you usually a fascist well depending
very rapidly yeah yeah um I just wanted
to be clear on that uh so I'm absolutely
a pro capitalist Pro premarket guy um
I'm not I'm never going to okay okay
okay okay okay well that that's good
it's good to get that clear why yeah um
because uh I would argue that when you
look at like the fall of the Soviet
Union or you look at the fail failure of
like socialist or communist regimes uh I
don't know if the issue there was so
much redistribution I think the problem
that was one of many issues I don't
think it was an issue at all actually I
would say I think the issue was uh
Commander wait a wait wait a minute what
what do you mean redistribution wasn't
an issue what the hell do you think they
did to the kulac that was forced
redistribution it resulted in the in the
death of six million people so maybe I'm
not understanding what you mean but that
was redistribution at its at its like
Pinnacle and forced redistribution was
brutal when I when I think of the um
when I think of the strengths of
capitalism um the ability for markets to
dynamically respond to shifting consumer
demand is like the reason why capitalism
and free market economies dominate the
world when you've got socialist or
communist systems uh command economies
where a government is trying to say this
is how much this is going to cost this
is how much you're going to produce and
make the this is a failed way of
managing a state economy even in places
where they still do it there are always
Shadow economies and stuff they were in
the Soviet Union that prop up where
people tried to uh basically amarate the
conditions that are resulting from said
horrible command economy practices uh so
I guess in a way you could argue a
command economy is kind of like
redistribution it's a form of it but no
it's a worse problem I if you're if
you're pointing to the fact that that's
a worst problem I'm I'm I would say
that's definitely the reason why these
places uh failed because they just
weren't able to respond to changing okay
so what's the difference
between going online without expressvpn
is like leaving your kids with the
nearest stranger while you go to the
restroom they're probably not a
kidnapper or a serial killer but why
would you ever take that risk every time
you connect to an unencrypted Network in
cafes hotels or airports you leave your
data vulnerable any hacker on the same
network can steal your personal data
such as your passwords and financial
details it doesn't take much technical
knowledge to hack someone hackers can
make up to $1,000 per person selling
personal info on the dark web expressvpn
creates a secure encrypted tunnel
between your device in the internet so
that hackers can't steal your sensitive
data it take a hacker with a
supercomputer over a billion years to
get past expressvpn's encryption I love
how easy expressvpn is to use you just
fire up the app and click one button to
get protected plus it works on all
devices phones laptops tablets and more
so you can stay secure on the go secure
your online data today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free that's
expressvpn.com
Jordan
okay so what's the difference between a
state that attempts to redistribute to
Foster equality of opportunity and and a
command economy is it is it a difference
of degree like are you looking at models
let's say like the Scandinavian
countries or I wouldn't use Canada by
the way because Canada is now uh what
would you call predicted predicted by
economic analysis analysts to have the
worst performing economy for the next
four Decades of all the developed world
so maybe we'll just leave the example of
Canada off the table Scandinavian
countries are often the polies that are
pointed to by I would say by people who
at least in part are putting forward a
view of redistribution for purposes of
equality of opportunity like you are but
they're a strange analogy because
they're very small countries and up till
now they were very ethnically
homogeneous exactly and that makes a big
difference when you're trying to flatten
out the redistribution plus they're also
incredibly wealthy which makes you know
redistribution let's say a lot easier so
so so so what's why why doesn't the
government that's bent on redistribution
fall prey to the pitfalls of command
economy and and forced redistribution
for that matter how do you how do you
protect against that I I think you have
to do is very very very difficult is
people get very ideologically captured
by both ends and they feel very uh I
guess like committed or they feel very
Allegient to pushing certain forms of
economic organization and I think
sometimes it blinds them to some of the
benefits of what exists when you
incorporate kind of multiple models or I
mean you'd call them mixed economies
which is really what every capitalist
economy today is it's some form of free
market capitalism combined with some
form of like government intervention to
control for negative externalities these
are the ways that all economies even in
Scandinavia in the world work and I
think that recognizing the benefits of
both systems are the best way to yeah
make work fair enough and and the
Scandinavian countries seem to have done
a pretty good job of that like I said
they have a simpler problem to solve
let's say than the Americans have
negative externalities that's a you know
that's an interesting Rabbit Hole to
wander down because the problem I have
with negative externalities you made a
case already that and again correct me
if I've got this wrong but I I think I
think that I understood what you
said um a free market free exchange
economy is a gigantic distributed
computational device basically yeah
right exactly enough one of the big
problems for command economies is called
the computation problem because no
central body can actually compute you
know the right exactly right that that's
not yeah that's that's a fatal problem
right because it doesn't have the
computational power it certainly doesn't
have the the speed of data recognition
it doesn't have on the on the ground
agents if if all of the perception and
decision- making is centralized right
it's way too low resolution it's going
to crash okay so and I think that that's
comprehensible technically as well as
ideologically
all right so but having said
that with regards to
externalities all the
externalities that a market economy
can't compute are so complex that they
can't be determined centrally by the
same argument and so there are ways to
account for them though really that work
with tell me how I can't see that
because I can't see how that they they
can be accounted for without
the same computational problem
immediately arising yeah and I
understand that and I think that's a
problem sometimes of people very far on
the left when they want to deal with
certain problems uh I think that they
want to bring like heavy-handed you know
like things like price controls in to
say well we need less of this so let's
just make this cost this particular
thing which ironically enough introduces
a whole other set of externalities that
will happen when you get a lot of
friction between where your price floor
or ceiling is set compared to what a
market was set it at but ideally if
you're a reasonable person and you view
economies as mixed economies what you
try to do is you try to take these
externalities meaning things that aren't
accounted for with your primary system
so in a capitalist system an externality
might be something that cause a negative
effect but it doesn't cost you any money
pollution would be a good example of
that and rather than saying like well no
company can pollute this much or you
know if you're a company you have to use
these things because we the other things
are making too much pollution all you do
is you say okay well if we've determined
that say carbon is bad for the
atmosphere we're just going to attach a
little price to that government is going
to say that yeah if you pollute this
much here's the price and then if you
want to pay for it you can but that type
of uh intervention in the economy
basically allows the free market to
hopefully do its job because the
government has tacked on a little bit of
a price that it tries to account for the
cost of that externality yeah great
that's a great example we can go right
down that rabbit hole carbon okay so
first of all um one of the things I've
seen you tell me what you think about
this something that I've seen that
actually shocks me that I was interested
in watching over the last five or six
years I wondered what would happen when
the left the progressives ran into a
conundrum and the conundrum is quite
straightforward if you pursue carbon
pricing and you make energy more
expensive then you hurt the poor and I
don't think you just hurt them in fact I
know you don't you just don't hurt them
I heard a man two days ago who's fed 350
million people in the course of his life
um heading the un's largest relief
agency make the claim quite
straightforwardly that that
misappropriation on the part of inter
interventionist governments increased
the rate of absolute privation
dramatically in in the world over the
last four or five years and not and that
has happened not least because of carbon
pricing not just carbon pricing but the
insistence that carbon per se is an
externality that we should control now
Germany's paid a radical price for that
for example so their power is now about
five times as expensive as it could be
and they pollute more per unit of power
than they did 10 years ago before they
introduced these policies that were
hypothetically there to account for
externality and the externality was
carbon dioxide I don't think that's a
computable externality and I don't think
there's any evidence whatsoever that
it's actually an externality that we
should be warping the economic system to
ameliorate if the cost of that and it
will be will be an increase in absolute
privation among the world's poor so and
here's a here's an additional argument
on that front with regards to
externalities you get that wrong and
here's something you could get right in
said if you ameliorate absolute poverty
among the world's 1 billion billion
poorest they take a longer view of the
future and that means they become
environmentally aware and so the fastest
route to a sustainable Planet could well
be the remediation of absolute poverty
and the best route to that is cheap
energy and we're interfering with the
development of cheap energy
by meddling with the hypothetically
detrimental externality of carbon
dioxide and
so it's it's I think this is a complete
bloody travesty by the way we are
putting the lives of hundreds of
millions of people directly at risk
right now to hypothetically save people
in the future depending on the accuracy
of our projections a 100 years out and
these these interventionists these
people who are remediating externalities
they actually believe that they can
calculate an economic projection one
century out that's utterly delusional so
okay so just as a to be clear the first
thing I was just giving an example of
how you can use like a government
intervention to make a free market track
something which which is what C and
trade or like carbon taxes would do um I
wasn't necessarily speaking to the
strength of that individual thing but
yeah but that's a good thing to focus
on externality we can focus on that as
well so um the first thing uh this is
going to sound mean uh but I'm you know
I'm very realistic uh there needs to be
a better argument than just it
disproportionately impacts the poor
classic leftist argument it might be
right but it's the same argument you
made to justify your swing to the left
at the beginning of our discussion you
said that you were looking at economic
inequalities that disproportionately
affected the poor so I can't see why and
I'm not trying to be mean about this
either I can't see why you could base
your argument that it was moral it was
morally appropriate for you to swing to
the left from your previous position
because you saw disproportionate effects
on the poor and I can't use that ARG
arent in the situation that I'm
presenting it right now well because it
depends on if we think it's a condition
that ought to be remedied or not for
instance if I walk you know around and I
see homeless people and I'm like man
this is really sad we ought to spend
more home money on homeless people
because it seems like they're
disproportionately affected by their
living conditions and then somebody says
oh well do you think we should still
lock up you know rapists and murderers
aren't they disproportionately poor I'd
probably say well yeah we probably
should go well isn't that hypocritical
well no I think that rapist and
murderers should probably be in jail but
we can also help the homeless at the
same time I think that just helping the
poor isn't an argument like a blank
check to do every possible thing to
satisfy poor people it's going to depend
from that's fine because the poor
everyone who's poor is not a victim some
people who are poor are Psychopathic
perpetrators and it's very useful to
distinguish them but I was making a much
more specific argument my argument was
that the fastest way out of absolute
privation for the world's bottom billion
people is through cheap energy yeah I I
understand what you're saying there so
just towards that um yeah I just want to
say that just because something targets
the poor is not necessarily an argument
against it another depends on how hard
it targets them and it depends on
whether Mass starvation is the outcome
the outcome is important that I agree
with so for instance like a
syntax outcome will be
masturation I'm get to it okay syntaxes
on like cigarettes and alcohol are
always going to disproportionately
impact the poor or even sugar we might
say right but just because that
disproportionately impacts the poor is
that a good thing or a bad thing these
are probably the people that suffer the
most from those particular afflictions
right right and that is an immediate
versus delayed issue too right because
the reason I mean obesity is an
immediate I don't think Al the reason
for the tax is is to stop people from
Pur pursuing a certain form of
short-term gratification at the cost of
their longer term well-being correct and
that that that exact same idea if you
believe climate models or if you believe
that we're heading in a certain
direction uh in terms of climate the
overall warming of the planet would be
the same argument you would make for
climate change if you believe that you
could model Economic Development 100
years into the future well we're not
trying to model we we're more concerned
with modeling climate development
economic
developmentally no well okay tell tell
me how I'm wrong I don't believe that
because what I see happening is two
things we have climate models that
purport to explain what's going to
happen over a century on the climate
side but we have economic models layered
right on top of those that claim that
there's going to be various forms of
disaster for human beings economically
as a consequence of that climate change
and so that's like two towers of Babel
stacked on top of one another and so
because if if people were just saying oh
the climate's going to change there'd be
no moral impetus in that it's the
climate's going to change and that's
going to be disastrous for the biosphere
and for Humanity but that's an economic
argument as well as a climate based
argument it's it's both but the the
worst the worst projections of what
would happen if the climate took a
disastrous turn are worse than the worst
projections of what is our planet going
to look like economically if we hardcore
police
why would you okay but understand the
distinction between the models well the
argument would be that whatever pain and
suffering poor people might endure right
now because of a move towards green
energy that pain and suffering is going
to be short-term and far less than the
long-term pain and suffering right but
that's dependent on the Integrity of the
economic models and the and and the
climate models as well right exactly but
that but in exactly the Stacked manner
that I described and like there's nobody
in 1890 who could have predicted what
was going to happen in 19 90
economically not not a bit not a bit and
and if we think we can predict like 50
years out now with the current rate of
technology and calculate the potential
impact of climate change on economic
flourishing for human beings we're
diluted no one can do that and then and
so and it's worse so imagine that as you
do that and you project outward your
margin of error increases that's
absolutely definitely the case and at
some point you're certainly on the
climate side the margin of error gets
rapidly to the point where it subsumes
any estimate of the degree to which the
climate is going to transform and that
happens even more rapidly on the
economic side potentially right now I
think right now this is a disagreement
on the fact of the matter though not the
philosophy of what we're talking about
in terms of controlling externalities if
we think I'm so I'm curious let's say
that we think we can accurately predict
the climate and the economic impact and
we think that the climate impact would
be far worse if we don't account for
that both in terms of human conditions I
don't believe any of those presumptions
I think but but I mean like obviously if
I agreed with that that factual analysis
I would probably agree with you on the
prescription here too right and like
none of the climate models were accurate
couldn't accurately
predict well they're not sufficiently
accurate that's the first thing and SEC
because they have a margin of error and
it's a large margin of error they don't
even model cloud coverage well that's a
big problem they don't have the
resolution they don't have nearly the
resolution to produce the accuracy
that's claimed by the climate apocalypse
mongers saying that but we just got
another one of the hottest years on
record how many times are we going to
have another hottest year on record how
many times are we going to have an
increase of carbon dioxide concentration
in the atmosphere before we're finally
like okay I don't know and the the
reason I don't know is because it
depends the scientific answer to that
question depends precisely on the time
frame over which you evaluate the
climate fluctuation and that's actually
an intractable scientific problem so you
might say well if you take the last 100
years this variation looks pretty disal
and I'd say well what what if you took
the last 150,000 years or the last
10,000 or the last 10 million you can't
specify the damn the time frame is
incredibly important that would be like
saying look at your you know uh let's
say somebody developed cancer and they
didn't realize it and the person is lost
you know 40 or 50 pounds in in the past
six months and like you you look very
sickly and you're like okay well look at
my weight fluctuation over the past 10
years say well it doesn't really matter
what matters saying the time frame isn't
important saying that it is important
saying don't know how to specify it well
you would probably specify with the
beginning of the Industrial Age right
why because when that's when carbon
dioxide which is a gas is trapping uh
more heat on the plan why is that
relevant to the time over which you
compute the variability because it seems
like as carbon dioxide has increased in
the atmosphere the surface temperatures
have risen at a rate that is a departure
from what we'd expect over 150,000 year
cycles of temperature variations on the
planet no not with that time frame that
not the case absolutely the case no what
do you mean you just flipped to 150,000
to your time span what I'm saying is
that if if we expect to see a
temperature do this in 150,000 year time
span in a 100e time span seeing it do
this that's very worrying Michael man's
hockey stick the one that's under attack
right now in court by a major
statistician who claimed that he
falsified his data mean that Spike the
I'm talking about the record
temperatures that are declared that have
been declared for like the past five
years that have also increased with the
uh with the concentration of parts per
million of carbon dioxide of the
atmosphere um I mean I'm going to tell
you that every model is perfect right
now sure but right now we're like
standing in traffic with our eyes closed
saying the car hasn't hit me yet so I
don't think there's any coming I think
it's pretty undeniable at this point
that there is an impact on climate
across the planet I just I think that's
highly deniable we have no idea what the
impact is from we don't know where the
carbon dioxide is from we can't measure
the warming of the oceans we have
terrible temperature records going back
100 years almost all the terrestrial
temperature uh uh uh detection sites
were first put outside urban areas and
then as right and then you have to
correct then you have to correct for the
for the movement of the urban areas and
then you introduce an error parameter
that's larger than the purported
increase in temperature that you're
planning to measure this isn't data this
is guess and there's something weird
underneath it there's something weird
that isn't oriented well towards human
beings underneath it it has this guise
of compassion oh we're going to save the
poor in the future it's like that's what
the bloody commun said and they killed a
lot of people doing it and we're walking
down that same road now with this
insistence that you know we're so
compassion that we care about the poor a
100 years from now and if we have to
wipe out several hundred million of them
now well that's a small price to pay for
the future Utopia and we've heard that
sort of thing before and the alternative
to that is for is to stop having global
level Elites plot out a utopian future
or even an anti- dystopian future
and that's exactly what's happening now
with organizations like the wef and if
this wasn't immediately impacting the
poor in a devastating manner I wouldn't
care about it that much but it is you
know I watched over the course of The
Last 5 Years the estimates of the number
of people who were in serious danger of
food privation rise from about 100
million to about 350 million that's a
major price to pay for a little bit of
what what would you say for for progress
on the climate that's so narrow it can't
even be measured I don't think the
increase in in hungry people on the in
the planet is because of climate
policies why not because I don't think
that countries in Africa are being
pushed away from fossil fuels the most
developing course they are they can't
even get they can't even get loans from
the World Bank to produ pursue fossil
fuel development and there's plenty of
African leaders who are screeching at
the top of their lungs about that
because the Elites in the west have
decided that well it was okay for us to
use fossil fuel for so that we wouldn't
have to starve death and our children
had some opportunities but maybe the
starving masses that are too large a
load for the world anyways shouldn't
have that opportunity and that's that's
direct policy from the UN fostered by
organizations like the W wef they're
going to have to turn to Renewables yeah
well good luck with that because
Renewables have no energy density
besides that they're not renewable and
they're not environmentally friendly and
then one more thing there's one more
weird thing underneath all of this okay
well let's say if carbon dioxide was
actually your bug bear and it was
genuine well then why wouldn't the
greens for example in Africa the
progressives be agitating to expand the
use of nuclear nuclear energy especially
because Germany has to import it anyways
especially because France has
demonstrated that it's possible we could
drive down the cost of energy with
lowcost nuclear and there'd be no carbon
production and then the poor people
would have something to eat because
they'd have enough energy and that isn't
what's happening and that's one of the
things that makes me extreme ly
skeptical of the entire narrative it's
like two things the left will sacrifice
the poor to save the planet and the left
will de-industrialized even at the
nuclear level despite the fact that it
devastates the poor and that's even
worse because if you devastate the poor
and you force them into a short-term
orientation in any given country where
starvation beckons for example they will
cut down all the trees and they will
kill down all the animals and they will
destroy the ecosphere
and so even by the standards of the
people who are pushing the carbon
dioxide externality control all the
consequences of that Doctrine appear to
me to be devastating even by their own
measurement principles we're trying to
fix the environment well boys and girls
doesn't look like it's working all
you've managed to do is make energy five
times as expensive and more polluting
you were wrong that didn't work and so
and I can't understand you can help me
that's why you're here today talking to
me I can't understand how the left can
support this just one quick thing let's
say that everything you've said is true
what do you think is the plan that what
is the goal what is the
drive like why push why push obviously
horrible ideas for the planet and the
poor that's a good question that's a
good question do well because you're
positive it right so what what do you
think is the driver goal well I listen
to what people say here's the most
terrible thing they say there are too
many people on the planet
okay so who says that I've heard people
say that for 30 years perfectly ordinary
compassionate people well there's too
many people on the planet and I think
well for me that's like hearing Satan
himself take possession of their spine
and and move their mouth it's like okay
who are these excess people that you're
so concerned about and exactly who has
to go and when and why and how and who's
going to make that decision and even if
you don't even if you're not conscious
ly aiming at that you are the one who
uttered the words you're the ones who
muttered the phrase what makes you think
that the thing that possessed you to
make you utter that words isn't aiming
at exactly what you just declared and so
that's you know that's a terrible Vision
but when you look at what happens in
genocidal societies and they emerge
fairly with Fair regularity and usually
with the utopian Vision at hand the
consequence is the mass destruction of
millions of people so why should I
assume that something horrible isn't
lurking like that right now especially
given that we have pushed a few hundred
million of people back into absolute
poverty when we were doing a pretty damn
good job of getting rid of that and I
just don't understand what's happening
in Germany or in the UK like it's
insane like look man if they would have
got rid of the nuclear plants and made
energy five times as expensive and the
consequence would have been they weren't
burning leg night coal as a backup and
their unit production of energy of
pollution per unit of energy had
plummeted you could say well look you
know we heard a lot of poor people but
at least the air is cleaner it's like
NOP air is worse and everyone's poorer
so like the explain to me how the hell
the left can be anti-nuclear okay I
don't understand it at all gotcha all
right um this is something that I
brought up earlier that is concerning to
me um I feel like when people people get
political beliefs I feel like what
happens is what we think happens what we
hope happen is you have some moral or
philosophical underpinning and then from
there you combine this with some
epistemic understanding of the world and
then you combine these two things you
engage in some form of analysis and your
moral be nice if that was true yeah you
start to apply like prescription so
maybe I'm religious maybe I analyze
society and I see that uh particular TV
shows lead to premarital sex so my
societal prescription is we should ban
these TV shows right ideally this is how
you would imagine this process works
what I find happens unfortunately all
too often is what people do is they join
social groups and then with those social
groups they inherit something that I
call like a constellation of beliefs and
this constellation of beliefs instead of
rationally building on each of these you
basically get this like Jenga tower that
is like floating over a table and every
block is like supporting itself and no
real part of the tower can be addressed
because you pull out one piece it all
falls apart so people become like very
stuck in all of this combined
constellation stuff and none of it is
really given like any analysis and you
can't really push anybody from from one
way or another uh in terms of like
reevaluating any of the beliefs that are
part of this constellation um I wish I
would have I that's fine
right sleep is the foundation of our
mental and physical health you must have
a consistent nighttime routine to
function at your best if you're
struggling with sleep you need to check
out beam it's not just your
run-of-the-mill sleep AIT it's a
concoction carefully crafted to help you
rest without the grogginess that often
accompanies other sleep remedies several
people on our team use beam's dream
powder to sleep better through the night
and show up ready for work other sleep
aids can cause next day grogginess but
dream contains a powerful allnatural
blend of raichi magnesium Eline appenine
and melatonin to help you fall asleep
stay asleep and wake up refreshed now
available in delicious flavors like
cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut butter
and mint chip better sleep has never
tasted better and today our listeners
get a special discount on beam's dream
powder their science-backed healthy hot
cocoa for sleep with no added sugar
better sleep has never tasted better
just mix beam dream into hot water or
milk stir or froth and enjoy before
bedtime if you find yourself struggling
to sleep give it a shot get up to 40%
off for a limited time when you go to
shop beam.com Peterson and use code
Peterson at checkout that's shop
bam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
for 40%
[Music]
off that's fine that's right well you
know there are models now of there are
models now of cognitive processing
belief belief system processing that
make the technical claim that what a
belief system does is constrain
entropy sure that's not surprising at
all okay so and now now the signal for
for released entropy which would be a
consequence of say violated fundamental
beliefs is a radical increase in anxiety
right and a decrease in the possibility
of positive emotion and so people will
struggle very hard against that which is
exactly the phenomena that you're
describing okay I agree with what you
said although so here's here's my yeah
so I'm not sure why it's relevant to
what to the issue I
was here here's my issue okay
so when I'm trying to evaluate a
situation like to think that I have some
uh I've got some insulation from the
effects of what liberals think or what
conservatives think is because on my
platform I don't necessarily have an
allegiance to a particular political
ideology like right now I'm like Center
left to Progressive but I break really
hard from Progressive on certain issues
I think Kyle Rittenhouse is in the right
I think basically everything you guys
are doing with indigenous people is
insane uh including the complete Mass
grave hoax uh I think that I'm a big
supporter of the Second Amendment uh I
have beliefs where I can break from my
side you know pretty hardcore because I
am not like Legion to certain political
ideology one thing that worries me with
this constellation beliefs thing is that
sometimes when it comes to evaluating a
particular policy or a particular
problem I feel like it's part of the
constellation and sometimes it inhibits
people from like taking a step back and
reasonably thinking about the issue so
when we're talking about climate change
you mentioned the WF sacrificing tons of
people the UN Global Elites uh five
times energy cost in Germany uh
genocidal people I feel like this is
part of like a whole thing where it's
like okay well let's take a quick step
back and let's just like think
rationally about this particular issue
for one moment okay well you asked me
what the motivation for anti-poor
policies might be so that's why I was
well I did but but I got all of those
things before I even asked that question
um because I think it's totally possible
that somebody might say okay well when
you put carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
it seems to cause an increase in surface
temperatures this has been happening
from about the 1800s and as we've
started to track surface temperatures
whether the thermometer is on top of the
Empire State Building or in the middle
of the field it seems like there's an
average rise in temperatures and people
all around the world are observing this
in some places more than others if you
live in Seattle and 20 years ago your
apartment building wasn't built with air
conditioner units you feel that now if
you live in place in London and you've
never had an air condition before now
that's not acceptable I think that
people on the ground can see that there
are changes and I think that scientists
when they look in Labs can see changes
it might be that some models aren't
precise enough and it might be that for
reasons we don't even understand well
the economic models certainly aren't
precise enough sure maybe maybe maybe
they can't even use them to predict the
price of a single stock for 6 months the
economic model models are not
sufficiently accurate to calculate out
the consequences of climate change over
a century not in the Le when you I I
like the comparison because economic
models can't predict individual stocks
but they do predict the rough rise of
the market if you invest in the s for
the cataclysmic collapse nope even with
the cataclysmic collapse accounted for
you're going to see about 7% Returns on
average with inflation over long call an
average a very sophisticated model
analogous to climate change that's the
difference between climate and weather
though right is that climate isn't going
to tell you what the temperature is on a
given day but it might tell you the
average surface temperature over a
period of 1 year or 10 years and I
that's the difference between climate
and weather that's like it is a
hypothetical but again we're seeing more
and more and more data every single year
that
getting let's jump out of our cloud of
presuppositions for a minute sure now
one of the things that no
wait I want to say there are there are
some things that we've gotten as a
result of investing in green energy that
have been good so for instance uh the
power of solar energy has dropped
dramatically in the United States faster
than anybody thought possible such that
uh uh solar energy is like competitive
or beating fossil fuels in certain areas
if as long as you can set the solar
panels up you're literally beating
fossil as long as the sun is shining
well it's I mean it still is we're not a
nuclear winter yet but it isn't when
it's cloudy and it why depending on
where you live there are places
equatorial places if you're trying to
set up a solar panel in uh in Seattle
you know you might not have as much like
or New York City might much or in
Germany true also I think Canada there
are also other issues that are coming up
that I think are obfuscating our ability
to evaluate what's being caused by Green
energy works is not when we look at
energy increases in Germany um I think
there's a similar constellation around
nuclear energy for instance people don't
want nuclear energy because they think
of nukes and they think of nuclear
meltdowns and they think of Chernobyl
and they think of Fukushima and they
think of atomic bombs and that's it and
that's stupid and I agree with you but
nuclear energy is a totally viable
alternative to other forms of why does
the radical left oppose it you think
it's just this m see you for for the for
the same reason the right opposes
vaccines because it sounds scary it's a
big thing and they don't trust it it
comes well the right has a reason to
distrust vaccines in the aftermath of
the covid debacle because they were
imposed by force and that was a very you
get to choose if you have a nuclear
power plant that's imposed by force too
no you don't get to choose where your
energy comes from if you live in a
country you just you turn the light
switch and hopefully you don't have a
Chernobyl that melts down in your
particular town right well you get to
choose it because you can buy it or
not Choice it but the nobody had a
choice with the vaccines nobody had a
choice whether or not they lived near
Chernobyl or not nobody's a choice
there's a nuclear well how realistic is
it to move like 500 miles that's like
telling conservatives when uh Biden
tried to do the ocean mandate for
vaccines like well you just get a
different job right I don't want to
debate about whether or not large
nuclear power plants are frightening
they are and there are Technologies now
where that's not a problem so so and and
I think I don't I think that's a coun
place for our disc to go because I also
understand why people are afraid of it
but what I don't understand for example
is why the Germans shut down their
nuclear power plants and The
Californians are thinking and have doing
the same thing when they have to import
power from France anyways like it's
complet burn coal which is a million
times worse not just coal liite yeah
right and then with regards to these
Renewable Power sources they have a very
they have a number of problems one is
they're not en they're not energy dense
they require tremendous infrastr
structure to produce they're they might
be renewable at the energy level but
they're not renewable at the raw
materials level so that's a complete
bloody lie they're insanely variable in
their power production and because of
that you have to have a backup system
and the backup system has to be reliable
without variability and that means if
you have a renewable grid you have to
have a parallel fossil fuel or coal grid
to back it up when the sun doesn't shine
and the wind doesn't blow which is
unfortunately very very frequently and
so again and so and I'm not going to say
there's no place for renewable energy
like solar and wind because maybe there
are specific Niche locals where those
are useful but the
logical uh what would you say antidote
to the problem of reliability if we're
concerned about carbon but we're really
not would be to use nuclear and the
greens haven't been like flying their
bloody flags for 30 years saying well we
could use fossil fuels for fertilizer
and feed people and we could use nuclear
power to drive energy costs down in a
carbon dioxide free manner that seems
pretty bloody self-evident to me and so
then it brings up this other mystery
that we were talking about earlier you
know what's the impetus behind all this
because the cover story is oh we care
about carbon dioxide which I don't think
they do especially given the willingness
to sacrifice the poor it makes no sense
to me and I think it's relevant to the
issue you brought up which is that
people have these constellations of
ideas and there's a driving force in the
midst of them so to speak they're not
necessarily aware of what that driving
force is don't we isn't it more likely
that people are either misinformed or
misguided than people are legitimately
trying to depopulate the planet I'm look
misinformed and ignorant that's that's
plenty relevant and worth considering
and stupidity is always a better
explanation than malevolence but
malevolence is also an explanation and
no I don't think it's a better
explanation because why would we waste
so much money sending food Aid having
Bush do uh you know programs through
Africa for AIDS having other
billionaires like Bill Gates invest so
much money and anti-malarial stuff like
why would all the global Elites be so
invested in helping and killing the
people here at the same time okay well
some of it's confusion okay you know and
some of it's the fact you know many
things can be happening simultaneously
with a fair bit of internal Paradox
because people just don't know which way
is up often but the problem with the
argument Okay so so you you tell me what
you think about this so you know
Hitler's cover story was that he wanted
to make the Glorious Third Reich and
Elevate the Germans to the highest
possible status for the longest possible
period of time okay but that wasn't the
outcome the outcome was that Hitler shot
himself through the head after he
married his wife who died from Poison
the same day in a bunker underneath
Berlin while Europe was inflamed well he
was insisting that the Germans deserved
exactly what they got because weren't
the noble people he thought they were
and then you might say well Hitler's
plans collapsed in flames and wasn't
that a catastrophe or you could say that
was exactly what he was aiming for from
the beginning because he was brutally
resentful and miserable right from the
time he was you know a rejected artist
at the age of 16 and so he was working
or something was working within him and
something that might well be regarded as
demonic whose end goal was precisely
what it attained which was the
devastation of hundreds of millions of
people and Europe left in a smoking Rune
and the cover story was the Grand Third
Reich and so there's no reason at all to
assume that we're not in exactly the
same situation right now I think there's
a great reason to assume I think that
Hitler's motives and everything he was
trying to do wasn't a secret I like I
don't think that anybody had the guess
that he was incredibly anti-semitic that
his AR and Supremacy was going to lead
to the destruction and the murder of
like so many different people in
concentration like none of this was a
secret it's not like he was hiding it um
some I mean like he he tried to maybe
hide the death can but nobody in Germany
was wondering like wow crazy the pograms
are happening as Jewish people that's so
crazy or wow they're all being shipped
to just mainly the Jews to camps to work
like that's kind of interesting or wow
he talks about this a lot in mind comp
but maybe it's just a coincidence uh I
don't think you can compare like Hitler
to people that are worried about climate
change the worry that I have here
because if we're applying this people
thought hit people in Germany thought
Hitler was perfectly motivated by the
highest of
benevolent if I would to take this
standard of evidence apply this lens of
analysis couldn't I say the exact same
thing about the conservative
constellation of belief they don't want
to intervene anywhere in the world
because they don't care about the
problems there uh they're
anti-immigration because they hate brown
people Trump wanted to ban Muslims from
coming to the United States because he's
xenophobic uh conservatives uh don't
want to have taxes to help the poor
because they want homeless people to
starve and and die in the winter uh like
I feel like if I some of that's true and
yes you can adopt that criticism I think
the difference with regards especially
to the libertarian side of the
conservative Enterprise but also to some
degree to the conservative enterpris is
they're they're not building a central
gigantic organization to put forward
this particular utopian claim and so
even if the conservatives are as morally
idled as the leftists and to some degree
that might be true they're not organized
with the same gigantism in mind and so
they're not as dangerous at the moment
now they could well be and they have
been in the past but at the moment
they're not and so of course you can be
skeptical about about people's
motivations when they're brandishing the
moral flag how would we why would we say
that they're not as concerned about the
gigantism I feel like everybody is when
it's a particular thing that they care
about you mean if whether they would be
inclined in that direction for sure that
conservatives wield the power of the
government whenever they feel they need
to adjust as liberals do right
conservatives were very happy to see for
instance abortion was brought back as a
look that's a good that's a good
objection I think that you're correct in
your assumption that once people
identify a core area of concern they're
going to be motivated to seek power to
implement that concern I think cancel
culture is a good idea too I think
conservatives uh prior to the 2000s if
they could censor everything related to
either LGBT stuff or weird musical stuff
or something that they didn't want their
kids to watch conservatives would do it
but now that you see that like liberals
and progressives are kind of wielding
that corporate Hammer now conservatives
are very much well hold on we need
freedom of speech we need a platform
everybody and now progressives are like
well hold on maybe we shouldn't platform
people I got I got no disagreement with
those things that you said and I have no
disagreement about your proposition that
people will seek power to impose their
their Central their Central Doctrine
okay so then you might say and so we can
have a very serious conversation about
that what do we have that ameliorates
that
tendency in the United States we've got
a de hopefully a form of decentralized
government I can't speak to Canada as
much but yes ex well yes that's that's
true so that's one of the institutional
protections against that because what
that does is put various forms of power
striving in conflict with one another
right and so that's a very intelligent
solution but then there are
psychological and philosophical
Solutions as well and one of them might
be that you abjure the use of power
right as a
principle and so that and this is one of
the things that was done very badly
during the covid era let's say because
the rule should be something like you
don't get to impose your Solution on
people using using compulsion and force
there's a Doctrine there which is any
policy that requires compulsion and
force is to be looked upon with extreme
skepticism now It's tricky because now
and then you have to deal with
psychopath
and they tend not to respond to anything
but force and so there's an exception
there that always has to be made and
it's a very tricky exception
but look let let me let me tell you a
story and you tell me what you think
about this because I think it's it's
very relevant to the concern that you
just you just expressed and I I don't
believe that the conservatives are
necessarily any
less tempted by
the by The Calling of power than the
leftists that's going to vary
from situation to situation though I
would say probably overall in the 20th
century the leftists have the worst
record in terms of sheer numbers of
people killed so I mean it depends on
how we're
Quantified okay we just quantify ma
how's that direct death of 100 million
people so you know that's a pretty Stark
fact and if we're going to argue about
that well then we're really not going to
get anywhere so I'm not disagreeing that
there the hore happened as well the
Soviet Union and the and China were
a war of I'm just saying for World War
II it depends on how much you attribute
the war does to Nazi ger ET ET but but
sure like largely speaking I I don't
think that the left beat the right uh
because the right wasn't trying I don't
think it's because Hitler's lack of
trying led him to kill L people than
what who ended up dying during the Great
Leap Forward or during the
industrialization of yes well I also
think it's an open question still to
what degree Hitler's policies were
right-wing versus leftwing and no one's
done the analysis properly yet to
determine that well what do we there was
a national socialist movement for a
reason and the Socialist part of it
wasn't accidental well but the so I mean
there was no uh you know cooperatively
fored businesses that were owned by all
of the people for the people and
distributed to the people and I don't
think redistribution was high on
Hitler's list of things that's true it
was Str mix of totalitarian Poli I don't
think it was a strange mix I think it
was a bid to appeal to uh mid-left and
Center left the KPD and the German
Socialist Party by calling themselves
National Socialist I think it was very
much like an authoritarian Ultra
nationalist regime that pretty squarely
fits with people get mad if you call
something far right or far left because
they have an you know one of the things
I would have done if I would have been
able to hang on to my professorship at
the University of Toronto would have
been to act extract out a random sample
of Nazi policies and strip them of of
markers of their origin and present them
to a set of people with conservative or
leftist beliefs and see who agreed with
them more and that analysis has never
been done as far as I know so we
actually don't know and we could know if
the social scientists would do their
bloody job which which they don't
generally speaking that's something we
could know we could probably use the AI
systems we have now the large language
models to determine to what degree left
and right beliefs intermingled in the
rise of national socialism so that's all
technically possible so and it hasn't
been done so it's a matter of opinion
sure I don't necessarily disagree um
that that that's something you could do
okay so I was going to tell you story
okay well this has to do with the use of
power so um I spent a time at uh with a
group of Scholars putting and analyzing
The Exodus story in Exodus seminar
recently and so the Exodus story is a
very interesting story because it's a
it's a what would you
say it's an analysis of the
central the central tendency of movement
away from tyranny and slavery that's a
good way of thinking about it so the
possibility of tyranny and the
possibility of slavery are possibilities
that present themselves to everyone
within the confines of their life
psychologically and socially you can be
your own Tyrant with regards to the
imposition of a set of radical doctrines
that you have to abide by and punish
yourself brutally whenever you deviate
from them and we all contend with the
issue of tyranny and slavery and there's
an alternative path and that's what the
Exodus story lays out and Moses is the
Exemplar of that alternative path
although he has his flaws and one of his
flaws is that he turns too often to the
use of force so he kills an Egyptian for
example an Egyptian Noble who has slayed
a Hebrews uh one of Moses Hebrew slave
brothers and he has to leave there's a
variety of indications in the text that
he uses his staff he uses his rod and he
uses power when he's supposed to use
persuasion and legal or verbal um
invitation and argumentation and this
happens most particularly most
spectacularly right at the end of the
soour so Moses has spent 40 years
leading the Israelites through the
desert and he's right on the border of
the promised land and really what that
means at a more fundamental basis is
that he's at the threshold of attaining
what he's been aiming at what he's
devoted his whole life to and he's been
a servant of that purpose in highest
order and the Israelites are still in
the desert which means they're lost and
confused they don't know which way is up
they're still slaves and now they're
they're dying of thirst which is what
you die of spiritual thirst if you're
sufficiently lost and they go to Moses
and ask him to intercede with God and
God tells Moses to speak to the Rocks so
that they'll reveal the water within and
Moses strikes the rocks with his Rod
twice instead right he uses Force and so
God says to him you'll now die before
you enter the promised land it's Joshua
who enters and not Moses okay and you're
you might wonder why I'm telling you
that story I'm telling you that story
because those Concepts at the center of
that cloud of Concepts that you
described are stories right they're
stories and if they're well formulated
they're archetypal stories and this is
an archetypal story that's illustrating
the danger of the use of compulsion and
force know and so one of the problems
you're obviously obsessed by and that
I'm trying to solve is what do we do as
an alternative to tyranny whether it's
for a utopian purpose in the future or
maybe for the purpose of like
conservative censoring music lyrics they
don't approve of and one answer is we
don't use Force we do the sort of thing
that you and I are trying to do right
now which is to have a conversation
that's aimed at clarifying things and so
that's a principle that that's something
like the consent of the Govern right M
it it it's something like but it's also
something like you have the right to go
to hell in a hand basket if that's what
you choose and I'm as long as you don't
you know in doing so you're not in
everyone's way too much you have the
right to your own destiny right and so
and you and you don't get to use power
to impose that that's the other thing
that worries me about what's going on on
the utopian front because the the
problem is you know once you conjure up
a climate
apocalypse and you make the case that
there's an impending disaster that's
delayed and you might say well delayed
how long and they response to we well
we're not sure but it's likely to occur
in the next hundred or so years which is
pretty inaccurate you now have a
universal get out of jail card that can
be utilized extremely well by power mad
Psychopaths and they will absolutely do
that because power mad Psychopaths use
whatever they can to further their cause
so here's my this is my issue I think
this is my issue with a lot of people
when it comes to political conversations
I think that everything you've said is
true and I think that all of it is it's
it's good analysis but I feel like it
just gets wielded sometimes in One
Direction and then people kind of miss
that it completely and fully describes
their entire side as well um and the
thing that I feel like the only solution
for this as you hinted at it um it's
more than just conversation although
that's a good start we have to go back
to inhabiting similar areas we have to
go back to inhabiting similar like media
Landscapes I think that the issue that
we're running into right now more than
anything else is people live in
completely separate realities at the
moment such that uh if we were even to
describe basic reality how many illegal
immigrants came into the United States
last year that should be a factual
number that we can know how many do you
think somebody um I the actual number
probably in the hundreds of thousands I
think some conservatives think it's 3
million per year over the past 3 years
because they look at like border
contacts or they look at a aslum Seekers
and they're not looking 3.6 million came
into the US and stayed yes through the
southern border okay so you know the
historical know average isli understand
I understand this sh the hisory
historically there's like 13 to 15
million people Full Stop in the United
States illegally that's like the history
of illegal immigration in the United
States but some uh but hey maybe I'm
wrong there right so we can say that
that that's an example of us living in a
fundamentally different reality um well
the Pew research group has established
quite conclusively that the variability
over the last 20 years for illegal
migration in the South border is between
300,000 and 1.2 million well the Pew
research can only establish I think the
number of people attempting to cross I
don't know if they can know I don't know
if Pew does like census analysis I'd
have to see well I don't well that's
that's a different issue right because I
don't know how you measure how many
illegal immigrants there are actually in
the country understand I just want to I
just want to point out I agree with you
I listen to a lot of Rush limbo growing
up I understand the fear of having a
government agency say climate change
therefore we have a blank check to do
whatever we want that's a scary which is
what they are doing the conservatives do
the same thing though I'm not claiming
otherwise yeah but the problem is I
think people don't talk about it so for
instance I heard so we can pretend now
that the conservative argument was just
compulsory vaccines are bad because they
infringe on my freedom that wasn't the
conservative argument the conservative
argument was that mass deaths were going
to happen Mass side effects were going
to happen uh there was going to be all
this corruption and stuff related to
vaccine distribution to the crazier
theories or microchips and blah blah
blah none of that came true absolutely
none of the conservative fear mongering
related to the MRNA vaccines came to
fruition but now that's all forgotten
and that was us none of what do you make
of the
EXs imagine being able to transition
academic papers textbooks websites
emails or PDFs into an audio format that
you can listen to while on the move the
listening app offers exactly this it's a
convenient and flexible solution for
those who want to learn anytime anywhere
the listening app offers life like AI
voices complete with emotion and
intonation for a realistic listening
experience it allows you to indulge in
your love for reading and learning even
when you're on the go take your studying
to the next level by uploading your
notes and listening to them on the
listening app with their note-taking
feature every time you come across a key
idea simply click the add note button
and the app instantly adds the last few
sentences to the notepad enhancing your
learning experience have you ever
experienced motion sickness while trying
to read your favorite book during a
journey
the listening app has got you covered it
allows you to easily convert text and
listen anywhere making your travel time
more enjoyable and nausea free normally
you'd get a twoe free trial but
listeners of the Jordan B Peterson
podcast can get a whole month free right
now just go to listing.com Jordan and
use code Jordan at checkout that's
listing.com Jordan and use code Jordan
at checkout
today forgotten and that was used what
do you make of the EXs d there for
related to vaccines there are almost
none this the MRNA vaccines have been
administered related to
vaccines abolutely know we absolutely
this is like settled sence what do we
know in terms of vaccine related no
that's not my
question excess deaths in Europe are up
about 20% and they have been since the
end of the covid par sounds really high
to me 20% I'll check afterwards but um
is this including like the ukra war with
Russia no no it's not including the
Ukrainian War okay no are you implying
that you think it's because of vaccines
I'm not implying anything I'm saying the
excess deaths are but what is your take
on what's causing it you said that you
said that in a counter to me describing
Mr vaccines you said well the excess
death for 20% that makes the implication
is that the vaccines are causing it or
okay first of all something is causing
it well at that obviously something is
causing or or some combination of
factors now one possibility is that
healthare systems were so disrupted by
our insane focus on the covid epidemic
that we're still mopping up as a
consequence of that wait are these exit
desk tracing back through covid as well
postco just postco postco okay right
they're terrifying right they're
terrifying and and they're not well
publicized and I excess trust are the
fact that you're speaking to them right
now seems like yeah but I far it down a
lot of rabbit holes it's not like it's
front bloody Page News on the New York
Times sure but I think EXs do is that's
a metric that you can Google and I'm
pretty sure there are like three
different huge organizations that track
EXs do around the world and many more
than three yes in every single European
country right okay well so one
relatively straightforward hypothesis is
that it's a consequence of the
disruption of the Health Care System the
staving off of cancer treatment Etc the
increase in depression anxiety
suicidality and alcoholism that was a
consequence of the lockdowns the
economic disruption and there's plenty
of reason to believe that some of that
is the case but the other obviously
glaring possibility is that injecting
billions of people with a vaccine that
was not tested by any stretch of the
imagination with the thoroughness that
it should have before it was forced upon
people also might be a contributing
factor partly we because we know that it
led to a rise in myocarditis among young
men and we also know that there was
absolutely no reason whatsoever to ever
recommend that That vaccine was
delivered to young children whose risk
of death at covid was so close to zero
that it might as well have been zero
when you're talking about a disease the
risk of death isn't the only thing that
you worry about for the talk about
transmission because that was another
thing that
the yeah but it didn't do anything to
trans absolutely did because of decrease
for Trans getting affected it didn't
destroy it didn't get rid of
transmission but it reduced trans it
claimed that it would get rid of trans
if you take one read of one single quote
I think that Biden said one time where
he said no come on I've heard so many
times cuz every say oh you can't take
anything Trump says seriously Biden one
time on the news says if you get the
vaccine you won't
trans do you know that our prime
minister in Canada deprived Canadians of
the right to travel for 6 months because
the unvaccinated were going to transmit
covid with more likelihood than the than
the
vaccinated so this wasn't one bloody
statement this was like thorough
government poliy saying there wasn't a
state given that if you get vaccinated
there is a 0% chance of transmitting the
disease the idea is that vaccines were
supposed to help because it reduces it
reduces your hospitalization reduces
death and it reduces transmission
hopefully by making it so that people
don't get sick or don't get sick for as
long all three of those things the
vaccines did exceedingly well they
continue to do that to this day but
especially for the first variant um and
then the Delta variant the vaccines
helped immensely here um they were
tested the myocarditis rates are like
seven out of 100,000 injections and the
myocarditis is generally a and it's
generly not as bad as even getting the
Corona virus itself which will lead you
also to much worse side effect than side
effects that have caused other vaccines
to be taken off the market before that a
seven out of 100,000 rate of acute
myocarditis or pericarditis is not a
worst uh side effect that any vaccine I
think that is a completely acceptable
given that the disease itself is more
likely to cause myocarditis or paric
carditis yes I don't think the data
suggests support that presupposition
anymore the latest peer-reviewed studies
show that that's simply not true
especially among young men man that so
there is an age bracket of young men
where the elevated rate of myocarditis
acute my from the vaccine might have
been higher but we're talking about like
three or four cases per 100,000 people
and again myoc PES are generally acute
conditions they the beginning I told you
at the beginning of this conversation
that the progressive leftists were on
the side of the pharmaceutical companies
it's not about being on the side of the
pharmaceutical companies it's about
really one really yeah well I see so
what I see what I see as the Unholy part
of that alliance with the pharmaceutical
companies is that it dovetails with the
radical utopian willingness to use power
to impose their utopian Vision well
otherwise how would you explain it
because the leftists should have been
the ones that were most skeptical about
the bloody pharmaceutical companies and
they jumped on the vaccine bandwagon in
exactly the same way that you're doing
right now pharmaceutical companies have
helped us tremendously through right
there we go fine
no no I don't think so I think they're I
see so you don't think that the far
ceutical companies who dominate the
advertising landscape with 75% of the
funding are corrupt I don't corrupt is a
broad no no it's you think corrupt with
a tinge of malevolence willing to
extract money out of people by putting
their health on the line you do you
think that we get effective drugs from
pharmaceutical companies not
particularly okay do you so do you think
that any vaccines work yes do you think
that any I don't think 80 of them
work at once for babies I I think that's
a little risky but yet we've been on
this vaccine schedule for how many
decades and bab don't this like this not
like this not carefully I had a ton of
vaccines when I was a child I'm pretty
sure that was the norm for people there
were a ton of vaccines there's way more
now okay and you think that well you can
understand why I mean look part of it no
doubt No Doubt part of it is a
consequence of the genuine genuine
willingness to protect children but the
moral hazard is quite clear and people
on the left used to be aware of this
what do you make where do you think the
MRNA vaccine the speeding up of it came
from how do you make for the fact that
it was Donald Trump that did work spe
Terror foolish panicking just like we're
doing with the climate issue so you
think Trump was was he in bed with the
Pharmaceuticals was he working with the
left or was it just a dumb that was the
only panicky thing he made he didn't try
to push for the mass lockdowns like
other far lot people would have wanted
him to do that was just the one mistake
he made was the pushing for the vaccine
no I think Trump undoubtedly made all
sorts of mistakes and lots and it wasn't
it certainly wasn't only the left that
stampeded toward the forc co covid
vaccine um um debacle but it was most
surprising to me that it emerged on the
left because the left at least had been
protected against the depredations of
gigantic predatory corporations by their
skepticism of of of of the gigantic
Enterprises that can engage in
regulatory capture and that just
vanished is it not possible that maybe
people looked and they said hey if all
the governments all the institutions all
the schools all the private companies
across all the countries around the
world are saying the same thing maybe it
is the case that this vaccine just helps
is that not possible oh sure they
probably that's sure of course it's
possible but that didn't mean it was
right well who they used Force they used
Force Force for all sorts of things in
terms of public we don't generally use
Force to invade people's bodies how long
have vaccine mandates been a thing in
Canada the United sit in the entire
world I don't think they should have
been a thing that's great if you don't
think they should have been when you say
we don't generally use Force we
absolutely use Force we use we've
enforce vaccines for a long time it's an
important part of public yes fair enough
we did it on a scale and at a rate
during the covid pandemic so-called
pandemic that was unparalleled and the
consequence of that was that we ejected
billions of people with an experimental
it wasn't a bloody vaccine of course no
it wasn't no it isn't yes it is it's not
have 100% success rate you think it's a
definition of vaccine the whole point of
the vaccine is to give your body a
protein to train on the IM system
techology who cares if it's not the same
there's plenty there's different us the
word vaccine so that they didn't have to
contend with the fact that it wasn't the
same technology there are different
types of vaccines that are different
Technologies the MRNA vaccines is a this
used to be vaccines now this is vaccines
no it was like this and now it's like
this no no no it was like this and now
it's like this the M&R Mna technology
was a radical qualitative Leap Forward
in technology you can call it a vaccine
if you want to but it Bears very little
resemblance to any vaccine that went
before that the reason it was called a
vaccine was because vaccine was a brand
name that had a track record of safety
and shoehorning it in that was one of
the ways to make sure that people
weren't terrified of the technology and
you know reason call because they're
injecting you something that's
inoculating you against something in the
future because of has proteins that
resemble a virus that infect overlaps
between between the MRNA Technologies
and vaccines to be sure but they
wouldn't have been put forward with the
rate that they were put forward if they
weren't a radical new technology and
it's bad in principle to inject billions
of people with an untested new
technology isn't it also bad and
principle for billions of people to get
infected with a worldwide pandemic that
initially was causing a decent number of
deaths a ton of complications shutting
down world economies maybe maybe it was
maybe it was so should we to engage in
that analysis and figure out like if we
look at the we're not engaging in the
analysis because now we're talking
whether not vacin or even vaccines are
not in St no no no we're no no don't
play that game that is not what I was
doing I was making a very specific and
careful case the MRNA technology by wide
recognition is an extraordinarily novel
technology and doesn't make it not a
vaccine though well okay it's a
radically transformed form of vaccine I
don't give a damn that still makes it
something so new that the potential
danger of its mass Administration was
highly probably highly prob to be at
least or more dangerous than the thing
that it was supposed to um protect
against and we are seeing that in the
excess death are absolutely not saying
so are you implying the ex were caused
by the vaccines or well know what
they're caused by well look if you're
going to use aam's razor you're kind of
stuck in an awkward place here
absolutely not talking this is most
administered vaccine of the or
inoculation or what do you prefer to
call the history of all of mankind every
single organization around the world is
motivated to call this out if it was a
bad thing you don't think Russia or
China would be screaming if Donald Trump
or the United States warp sped through a
vaccine that was having dilar effects on
populations all around the world you
don't think there wouldn't be some
academic institution you didn't think
there'd be more than a handful of and
Joe Rogan and some conservatives saying
this vaccine might have been bad if it
was the case that American companies
working with companies in Europe and
Germany especially why because that's
where biotech is from in order to create
a or manufacture a vaccine that was
causing excess dust all around the world
there are so many different people that
we motivated to call this out how do you
explain call no it's a handful of people
where are the governments calling out
where the academic institutions calling
out where are the other private
companies calling it out wouldn't you
stand to make a killing if you were a
private company in Europe and you could
say look the M vaccines for sure are
causing all of these issues why wouldn't
Putin why wouldn't P why wouldn't
anybody else in the world call this out
it was as horrible as it was there are
plenty of people attempting to call
nobody credible and no huge
institution what do you make of the
excess deaths you haven't come up with a
bloody hypothesis I don't know if there
are 20% at the excess deaths in Europe
right now if I had to guess off the top
of my head it's going to be like you
said one might be lingering effects of
an overwhelmed Healthcare System another
one might be uh deaths related to the
war in Ukraine another one might be
rising energy costs that impossible that
any of it could be unint consequences of
a novel technology injected into
billions of people I think that if
acccess first of all there aren't
billions of people in Europe so if there
were access I understand but you're
talking about excess deaths in Europe
I'm not aware of excess deaths that
exist in other places that are
completely and totally unaccounted for
where the only explanation could be the
vaccine I think if there were I think
more people be talking about it well we
have well first of all the number of
people talking about something is not an
indication of the scientific validity of
a
claim why are you using mass consensus
as a as the determinant of what con
think because I think for something that
was given to billions and billions of
people if this was something have a
measurable effect on people it would be
it would be impossible to cover it up or
ignore it we wouldn't have to look at
the one case brought up on a on a
documentary we would have to look at the
one thing being talked about then what
do you make of the v's data there's more
negative side effects reported from the
MRNA vacines then there were reported
for every single vaccine ever created
since the dawn of time time and not by a
small margin so it's not just the excess
deaths it's the v's datae what is vars
data it's the data based that until the
covid-19 pandemic emerged and we had the
unfortunate consequence that there were
so many side effects being reported it
was the gold standard for determining
whether or not vaccines were safe and
now as soon as it started to misbehave
on the MRNA uh vaccine front we decided
that we were going to doubt the validity
of the v's reporting system okay the
Point say would never be the go Center
for anything fars repointing is just if
you want to report that there is some
issue that you have after getting a
vaccine that's it I think it's vaccine
aders what the hell do you think it was
set up for to report Adverse Events that
happen after a vaccine to track and see
if something was related to the vaccine
so most people most people didn't even
know vs existed until after the covid
vaccine once people know that it exists
of course more people are are going to
engage with it but what happens sub no
well it could be or couldn't be so what
do you do when a bunch of you first of
all might you might Begin by suggesting
that maybe it's not all noise correct so
when all of these things are admitted to
vs what they do is from there they
investigate all you can do all of their
all theirs is is I might go and get a
vaccine and maybe in three days they go
hm I've got a headache I'm going to go
ahead and like call my doctor and and
make this report and they'll say okay
well that's an advertisement after
vaccine doesn't mean the vaccine caused
the headache and now that more
people say is not the gold standard of
determining if working compared to
actual uh longitudinal perspective
randomized control trial you mean like
the ones they should have done to the
goddamn vaccines they did do for the VAC
they continue to do to this day yes that
is correct yes you really think that
you're in a position to evaluate the
scientific credibility of the trials for
the vaccines do you no I don't so I have
to trust you I don't trust I look at the
bloody dat you have first of all you
have to trust third parties to some
extent when you go outside I don't have
to trust course you do you do every day
when you turn the keys your car you hope
your engine doesn't explode when you're
drinking water you hope that the public
water or whatever tap or bottle water
you got out of isn't contaminated or
poison with chera when you that as a
consequence of consensus no you of
course you do no I don't I do that as a
consequence of observing multiple times
that when I put the godamn key in the
ignition the truck started why do you
know it's going to start the 50th or the
100th time why how many times with me
know you don't know if the Denim and
those genes isn't leaking into your
bloodstream to some extent We Trust we
have to trust third party in
use
Force when they use Force we trust the
police officers we trust the Jal system
we on the left trust the police do we to
some extent do we if somebody's breaking
into your house who I'm not I'm not a
defund but if somebody's breaking into
your house you can be the most defunded
person in the world who you going to
call you going to call your neighbor are
you going to call Joe Biden are you gon
to call Obama or you going to call the
Black Panthers you're going to call the
Cs okay so so tell me this tell me this
then because the core issue here is use
of force as far as I'm concerned you
know we we examine some of the weeds
around that
politicians throughout the world and
this would be true on the conservative
side now in the aftermath of the covid
um tyranny because it was more a tyranny
than a pandemic okay were are now saying
that we actually didn't force anybody to
take the vaccine so what do you think of
that claim like so let's define force I
think it's technically true but I think
it's silly what do you mean it's
technically true def technically true
and that in the United States at least I
think the idea what they tried to do
they weren't able to do it because the
Supreme Court shot it down was Biden
tried to make it so that OSHA who's the
body that regulates job safety could
make it so that employees had to get
vaccinated now eventually it was or
theyd lose their job okay does that
qualify as Force that's why I said
technically but I'm it's a serious
question I mean because we need to
Define what constitutes Force before we
can it seems to me you could argue it's
a type of force sure I mean I think it'd
be silly to say it's nothing it is a
type of force it is the same as a cop
telling you you have to do this you're
going to be killed no but it's it's on
the Spectrum of course yeah it's as much
force as the M mRNA vaccines are
vaccines sure it is a type of force and
the okay so look I really think I really
think the problem was with the covid
response I really think the problem was
the use of force I mean I can understand
to some degree although I'm very
skeptical of the pharmaceutical
companies and far more skeptical than
your insistence upon the utility of
consensus might lead me to believe
you're skeptical of them which is
surprising I would say given very that's
why I'm glad there's multiple companies
multiple countries multiple academic
institutes that do research and the FDA
yeah I'm very skeptical you should be in
any private system you should be
skeptical to every private company of
course whether we're talking media
Pharmaceuticals or automobile
manufacturers yeah but skepticism
doesn't mean a blind adherence to the
complete total opposite of whatever it
is they're saying right they're indoubt
undoubtedly like if you look at
Alzheimer's research there's been
groundbreaking Improvement on drugs to
treat Alzheimer's research over the past
3 years that 5 years ago none of these
drugs even existed and now yeah so I
mean how about if you're skeptical of
anyone who's willing to use Force to put
their Doctrine forward then you're
skeptical of literally every single
person political ideology ever to ever
have existed in all of humankind some
degree of force you would I'm
undoubtedly believe this right some
degree of force is probably necessary
for any kind of cohesive Society right
no I don't believe that of course there
is no even if you had a tribe of 100 120
people if somebody was a if somebody was
stealing something right you have to
punish that person I said earlier that
that that that becomes complicated when
you're dealing with the psychopathic
types right so that's a complication but
I would say generally speaking that the
the necessity to use force is a sign of
bad policy and no I don't think see I'm
not particularly a hobbsy and I don't
think that the only reason people
comport themselves with a certain degree
of Civility in civilized sociey is
because they're terrified by the fact
that the government has a monopoly on
force that can be be brought against
them at any moment I think that keeps
the psychopaths in line to some degree
but I think that most people are enticed
into a Cooperative relationship and that
formulating the structures that make
those relationships possible is a sign
of good policy I've got to I have to ask
because I have watched a lot of your
stuff in the past um I remember you
speaking very distinctly on this that
for instance when two men are
communicating with each other there is
an underlying threat of force that kind
of puts on the guard rails those
particular social interactions for the
thread of forces don't be
Psychopathic what is how broader is
psychopathic here are we defining well I
can Define it I mean sure yeah go for it
while a psychopath will gain short-term
Advantage at the cost of long-term
relationship okay that's really the core
issue well you know you you made it you
made a a reference to something like
that earlier in your discussion when you
pointed out that people claim to be
motivated let's say by principle but
will default to short-term gratification
more or less at the
yeah yeah yeah exactly well the the
exaggerated proclivity to do that is at
the essence of psychopathy so it's a
very it's with that with this definition
of psychopathy does it's that definition
of psychopathy it's not a it's not mine
that's the core of psychopathy okay I'm
not in the in the United States I think
we call it all aspd now um no it's
separate from that's antisocial
personality disorder there thought that
subsumed psychopathy and psychopathy is
no Psy psychopathy is more like some
it's more the pathological core of
antisocial personality disorder okay
maybe that might be okay that's a better
way of think like the worst a small
number of criminals are responsible for
the vast majority of crimes it's 1%
commits 65% something like that do you
think a psychopathy something that can
be environmentally induced or do you
think this is core to a person it's both
so for example if you're disagreeable
like you are by the way one of the your
proclivity if you went wrong would be to
go wrong and an antisocial and
Psychopathic Direction that's more true
of men for example than it is for women
that's why men are more likely to be in
prisoned by a lot think it's 10 to1 or
20 to1 generally depends on the
particular crime with it being higher
proportion of men as the violence of the
crime mounts so you could imagine on the
genetic versus environment side so
imagine that when you're delivered your
temperamental hand of cards you're going
to have a certain set of advantages that
go along with them that are part and
parcel of the without genetic
determination and there's going to be a
certain set of Temptations as well so
for example if you're high in trait
neuroticism you're going to be quite
sensitive to the suffering of others and
be able to detect that that's useful for
infant care but the cost you'll pay is
that you'll be more likely to develop
depression and anxiety and if you're
disagreeable if you're disagreeable
extroverted and unconscientious then
you're the Tilt the the place you'll go
if you go badly is in the psychopathic
or antisocial Direction and there are in
environmental determinance of that to
some degree sure gen Express themselves
in an environment I I agree um when I'm
just curious with the definition of
psychopathy for short-term gain at the
expense of long-term relationship that's
probably the best B yeah when you look
at stuff like people that are
self-destructive say people that engage
in Behavior least like obesity is that
like a type of psychopathy to you or is
that like something different or how do
you define these types of things I guess
or how do you view that type of thing
well the the the no no there is an
overlap in that addictive processes one
of which might lead to obesity do have
this problem of prioritization of the
short term but the distinct so that
overlaps with the short-term orientation
of the psychopath but a psychopath is
see an obese person isn't gaining
anything from your demise at to
facilitate their obesity right so
there's a predatory and parasitical
element to psychopathy that's not there
in other addictive short-term processes
do you think is it possible that there
are things
because then to Circle back to the the
tribal example I gave isn't it possible
that people can commit harms against
other people where they're not
necessarily gaining from their demise
but it's just some other sort of gain
that so for instance like say like I'm
talking to some friends and I'm just
gossiping or shitalking another person
I'm not necessarily feeling good that
I'm trashing them per se I'm feeling
good because this group of friends might
be me her more favorably because I have
like a gossip or something to share with
her well but but that's the gain right
there is and you are contributing to the
demise of the people you're gossiping
about but I think there's like I feel
like there's fundamentally different
type of thought process between like I
want to tell you something juicy about
this guy because it'll make you like me
versus I want to tell you something
juicy about this guy cuz I hate this guy
and I want him to like have a worse
reputation among people feel like
there's different drivers for that I
would say that's that's an interesting
distinction I would say proba probably
that the hatred induced malevolence is a
worse form of malevolence than the
popularity inducing malevolence yeah the
only reason tough one yeah the only
reason I bring that up is because I feel
like a lot of malevolence that we have
social guard rails for is that type of
like selfish malevolence where you're
not I would argue even the majority of
malevolence in the world is usually
people acting selfishly or being
inconsiderate not necessarily like I
hate this yeah I think that's right I
think that well that's why Dante
outlined levels of hell right yeah well
exactly that and I mean that that that
book was an investigation into the
structure of malevolence right he put
betrayal at the bottom which I think is
right I think that's right because
people who devel post-traumatic stress
disorder for example which almost only
accompanies an encounter with
malevolence rather than tragic
circumstances they are often betrayed
sometimes by other people but often by
themselves and yes there are levels of
hell you know and you outlined a couple
there so I guess then my question is
just that if you have people so the kid
that steals an orange from a stand not
because he hates the shop owner but
because he wants the orange or he's
hungry without some type of societal it
doesn't have to be the government it
could be family religious without some
type of of use of force do you think
that Society ever exists without use
force on your wife um well what are we
considering force is withholding sex for
instance is that considered force or is
uh you know saying we're going to cation
of an expected reward is a punishment so
so you could well no but but I mean this
is a serious question I mean look look
if we're we're thinking about the
optimization of social structures we
might as well start from the base level
of social structure and scaffold up sure
so like if a wife is upset at a hband
for instance would that be considered uh
use of force I think a negative
punishment you're removing a stimulus to
punish a person for something yeah would
you consider that like a use of force or
I would say it would depend to some
degree on the intent the intent is to
punish well if the intent is to punish
then then it's starting to move into the
into the domain of force I mean look
look while we've been talking you know
there's been bursts of emotion right and
that's because we're freeing entropy and
trying to close and to enclose it again
and so that's going to produce it
produces negative emotion fundamentally
most fundamentally anxiety and pain and
secondarily something like anger because
those emotions are quite tightly linked
and So within the confines of a marriage
because we might as well make it
concrete there are going to be times
when disagreements result in bursts of
emotion and those bursts of emotion
don't necessarily have to have an
instrumental quality right it's when the
emotion is used manipulatively to gain
an advantage that short term for the
person and then maybe that's at the
expense of the the other person or even
at the expense of the person who
benefits future self then it starts to
tilt into the manipulative there's a
there's a tetrad of of of traits so
narcissism melanism that's
manipulativeness narcissism is the
desire for unearned social status that's
what you'd gain for example if you were
gossiping and elevating your social
status melanism narcissism psychopathy
that's predatory parasitism and those
culminate in sad M and that cloud of
negative emotion that's
released in the aftermath of
disagreement can be tilted in the
direction of those traits and that's
when it becomes malevolent and that's
when the problem of force starts to
become Paramount because I I think I
think that your I think that your
fundamental presupposition was both
Hoban and ill-formed I do not believe
that the basis for the Civilized poity
is force now you're saying that you know
you can't abjure the use of force
entirely and I would say unfortunately
that's true I agree with you but if the
if the policy isn't Invitational if I
can't make a case that that's powerful
enough for you to go there voluntarily
then the policy is flawed now it may be
that we have some cases where we can't
do better than a flawed policy because
we're not smart enough and maybe the
incarceration of mult of criminals with
a long-term history of violent offenses
is a good example of that we don't know
how how to invite those people to play
they they have a history generally from
the time they're very young children
from the age of two of not being able to
play well with others and it's a very
very intractable problem there's no
evidence in the social science
literature at all that hyper aggressive
Boys by the age of four can ever be
socialized in the course of their life
the penological evidence suggests that
if you have multiple offenders your best
bet is to keep them in prison until
they're 30 and the reason for that is it
might be delayed maturation you know
biologically speaking but most criminals
start to burn out around 27 so it spikes
it's a big spike when puberty hits and
then stability among the hyper
aggressive types so actually what
happens is the aggressives at four tend
to be aggressive their whole life and
then they decline after
27 the normal boys are not aggressive
they Spike at puberty and go back down
to Baseline right and so you don't
really rehabilitate people in prison for
obvious reasons I mean look at the
bloody places there are great schools
for crime in in large but if you keep
them there until they're old enough they
tend to mature out of that except the
worst of them tend to mature out of that
predatory short-term oriented lifestyle
so yeah the force issue yeah I agree I
agree so I fundamentally to to clear uh
my my um I guess my stance up I agree
agree that fundamentally you're not
Building Society on force uh if for no
other reason because there'd be so much
friction it would fly apart of the seams
right you can't force get resistance if
for fundamentally we're building off of
cooperation you want to invite people to
participate in society I agree with that
I just I feel like once you start to hit
certain threshold or certain points and
You' got so many different types of
people involved um at some point we're
going to have to have Force around the
edges on the guard rails just to make
sure that we don't allow are you fam
with like tit fortat systems ESS yeah
tit fortat is probably a really
important part of evolutionary
biological history and an important part
of the animal kingdom and I think to
some degree that Tit for Tat punishment
is important to force or Justice you can
call it what it is no no no I'm curious
what you think I'm I'm this's a very
serious question yeah because the Tit
for Tat the Tit for Tat is very bounded
right it's like you cheat I whack you
and then I cooperate right so and I do
think that there's a model there for
what we actually conceptualize is
Justice it's like you don't get to get
away with it but the goal is the
reestablishment of the Cooperative
Endeavor as fast as possible of course I
agree but in a reductionist way we're
kind of just using Justice here as a
standin for Force right a TI for Tat
system a tit for a TI so there are
different types of Tit for Tat systems
right you've got tit Tit for Tat you've
got tit for tatat you've got there's all
sorts of type systems where maybe you'll
let somebody make a mistake one or two
times but you can't have a ti ti ti ti
tit system because then somebody can
come in and take advantage of it so that
which is the problem with the
compassionate left by the way for to
some extent sure it can be um or a
problem with the right that's far to
forgiving of Donald Trump um but I would
say that that tat part the you can call
it justice I think Justice is a
perspective of force right where some
people might consider a force to be just
the cop that arrests the murderer and
other people might consider that force
that tat to actually be Injustice
because the the murderer was responding
to environmental conditions blah blah
blah or was a stupid theory that
responding to environmental conditions
Theory because here's no it's not I mean
because essentially that's written house
self-defense ising with so if you assume
that there's a causal pathway from Early
Childhood abuse to criminality let's say
which is the test case for environmental
determination of the proclivity for the
exploitation of others okay then it
spreads to it spreads near exponentially
in populations that isn't what happens
so here here's the
data most people who abuse their
children were abused as children but
most people who are abused as children
do not abuse their children and the
reason for that is because if you are
abused there's two lessons you can learn
from that one is identify with the
abuser the other is don't right exactly
and what happens and if this didn't
happen every single family would be
abusive to the core very rapidly what
happens is the proclivity for violence
is self it dampens itself out with as a
consequence of intergenerational
transmission so the notion that
privation is a pathway to criminality
that's not that's not a that's not a
well-founded that's not a well-founded
formulation and and there are an
infinite number of counter examples and
they're crucial some of the best people
I know and I I mean that literally are
people who
had childhood so absolutely abysmal that
virtually anything they would have done
in consequence could have been Justified
you know and they chose not to turn into
the predators of others and that was a
choice and often one that caus them to
re-evaluate themselves right down to the
bottom of their soul and so that casual
Association of relative poverty even
with criminality we know also we know
this too you take a neighborhood where
there's relative poverty the young men
get violent they don't get violent
because they're all hurt and they're
victims they get violent because they
use violence to seek social status and
so even in that situation it's not oh
the poor poor it's no wonder they're
criminal cuz they need bread it's like
sorry buddy that's not how it works the
hungry women feeding their children
don't become criminals the
extraordinarily ambitious young men who
feel it's unfair that their Pathway to
success become violent and that's that's
100% well documented and generally by
radically left leaning Scholars sure I
don't disagree with any of that wealth
inequality in areas is a much better
predictive crime than than poverty than
AB right but it's a very specific form
of crime it's status seeking crime by
Young men right well but but that shows
you what the underlying motive is it's
not even redress of the economic
inequality it's actually the men
striving to become sexually attractive
by gaining position in the dominance
hierarchy I think you have to be really
careful with that assessment though
because you can say that it's not
economically uh it's not seeking
economic why do you have to be careful
the biggest predictor well because we're
assuming that people that commit crime
in these types of circumstances are
status seeking and not trying to seek uh
ecomic remedy but it exact what we're
assuming but it might be the case for
instance that in economically prosperous
areas that the men there aren't actually
seeking economic Prosperity they're also
just trying to elevate status but they
do it through economic prosperity it's
potential right they do it they do it
with a longer term vision in mind sure
they're trying to elevate I wouldn't
disagree with that in in the least but
they do it with a much longer time
Horizon in in mind and we know this
partly because there have been detailed
studies of gang members for example in
Chicago who are trying to ratchet
themselves up the economic ladder but
they do it with a short-term orientation
most of them think they're going to be
dead by their early 20s sure so they're
trying to maximize short-term gain so it
has nothing to do with the with the
redress of economic inequality except in
the most fundamental sense and it is
status driven because they're they're
looking for comparative status I just I
don't think any human being has baked in
a desire to seek economic Prosperity I
think that that's like a third order
thing that we look for and fundamentally
it's probably more like safety security
for ourselves and then status seeking
for other things I think that changes
when you have children um well I mean
the status is irrelevant or starts to
become irrelevant at that point I mean
depending on how you view your status
right you can't do that every time we
have a discussion say for instance one
of the important things for my child is
to be able to send my child to a good
school I need to have an elevated status
right I need to be able to buy a house
at the right School District or I need
to be able to pay the education but
you're not telling me I hope that the
driving Factor behind your desire to
care for your children is an elevation
in your status no but I'm saying that
the elevation of status might be what
allows you to take care of so for
instance one of the biggest predictors
of getting married is already Stat or
position well that's what I'm saying I'm
saying there's like a there's a all
these play into yeah okay look we're
running out of time you're
good go back I say that that Tit for Tat
thing I was just saying that the tat
thing there is some underlying built
into probably our genes right because we
see it all throughout the animal kingdom
that there's some level of punishment or
some level of force you call itce no but
but I think I think it's the right I
Justice when you're the tatter not when
you're the titter though right the it's
just retribution no no I don't think
that's true either look if you read
crime and punishment for example one of
the things you see that emerges when
Rolen kov gets away with murder and it's
a brutal murder and he gets away with it
it's completely clear and he has a
justification for it and what happens as
a consequence is that that disturbs his
own relationship with himself so
profoundly that he can't stand it such
that when a just punishment is finally
Meed out to him it's a relief and that's
not rare and that is like there isn't
anything more terrifying this is why
crime and punishment is such a great
novel there isn't anything more
terrifying than breaking a moral rule
that you thought you had the ability to
break and finding out that you're
somewhere now that you really don't want
to be and then that you know you know
there's nothing worse in your own life
than waiting for the other shoe to drop
if you've transgressed against the moral
Rule and now you're an outsider because
of that you live in no man's land the
fact that you have just retribution
coming to you that can be a precondition
for your atonement and your integration
back into society but it's probably
important to note that depending on the
system you exist in those moral
transgressions just aren't right so to
take it back to I'll use your leus
example you might consider a threat of
force for somebody to get a vaccine to
be a highly immoral thing that might be
a transgression against some fundamental
moral thing but a person the left might
think that they're
satisfying their moral requirement to
society by doing so much the same as a
Child Soldier or or or not I want use
Child Soldier but maybe an older person
that's committing inata or some kind of
Islamic terrorist thinks that they're
fulfilling some moral calling as well no
doubt no doubt that that's the case
that's why I was focusing in on the use
of force is that I think it's a rule of
A good rule of thumb policy that if you
have to implement your godamn scheme
with Force then there's something wrong
with the way it's
formulated we could have used we could
have used a pure Invitational strategy
to distribute the vaccine it would have
been much more effective and it was bad
policy rushed we're in an emergency we
have to use Force it's like no no you
weren't it wasn't it wasn't the kind of
emergency that justified force not least
because behavioral psychologists known
for decades that force is actually not a
very effective motivator it produces a
vicious Kickback so you know one of the
things this is going to happen for sure
you know is that the net deaths from
people stopping using valid vaccines as
a cons consequence of General skepticism
about vaccination is going to cause in
my estimation over any reasonable amount
of time far more deaths than covid
itself caused you you violate people's
trust in the public health system at
your great Peril and you do that by
using force and we did that and so you
can see already that there's hordes of
people who are vaccine skeptic very this
generalized skepticism that to some
degree you were rightly decrying it
spreads like wildfire and no wonder
because if you make me do something I'm
going to be a little skeptical of you
for a long time you know this
conversation we're here voluntarily like
we're trying to Hash things out and in
good faith you know but neither of us
compelled the other to come here and
neither of us are compelled to continue
and so that makes it a fair game and a
fair game is something that everyone can
be invited to and I suppose that's
something that's neither right nor left
you know hopefully right something we
could conceivably agree on and I also
think that I don't have any Illusions
about the fact that
there are people on the right who would
use power to impose what they believe to
be their core their core what their core
the core what would you say their core
Idol of course the the temptation to use
force is rightly pointed to by The
leftists Who insist that power is the
basis for everything it it isn't the
basis for everything that's wrong it's
really wrong but it's a severe enough
impediment to progress forward that we
have to be very careful about it so look
we have to we have to stop sure sure
yeah I want to know if there's anything
else you'd like to say before we stop
because unfortunately we have to stop
rather abruptly and
so uh I think I yeah I feel like we got
I feel we got pretty far into this
um what are you trying to accomplish
let's start stop with that we we found a
little bit about we found out a little
bit about who you are I mean you
formulated
your your proclivity in terms of to some
degree in terms of delight in
argumentation or facility at it which
you certainly have um the danger in that
of course is that you're you can be
oriented to win arguments rather than to
pursue the truth and that's the danger
of having that facility for
argumentation but what are you hoping to
accomplish by engaging in conversations
like this in the public sphere elevation
of status you know that's one
possibility no I I feel like um I think
debate or argumentation is good because
it forces two sides to make their ideas
somewhat commensurate to the other uh if
two people are having a conversation
they have to be able to communicate set
ideas to the other person otherwise it's
just a screaming match and I think there
is a good for the sake of like just
being bipartisan or having a collection
of people in a certain area and having
different people together just that in
and of itself without anything else
happening I think produces a good at
least for a Democratic Society uh for
instance like I would agree that uh
School uh maybe not faculty but
administrators are very very very very
very far left today dangerously so I
don't have to talk to you about this
obviously um but I think part of the
responsibility to that I think rest at
the feet of conservatives who instead of
uh maintaining participation in the
system decide that they're going to
throw their hands up and disengage uh
when I go and forced out or be forced
out my Cas that's F yeah sometimes it
can happen but I think that rather than
rather than accepting being forced out
or rather than uh encouraging other
people to disengage the engagement has
to happen
Sy going here like it because in a
democracy sometimes the guy you don't
like wins sometimes the policy that you
don't like is enforced sometimes a guy
you don't like is somebody you have to
share an office or a classroom with and
we need to be okay with that and I'm
worried that like the internet is
driving people into these like very
homogeneous but very polar G the data on
that by the way aren't clear like
whatever is driving polarization doesn't
seem to be as tight related to the
creation of those internal Bubbles as
you might think like I I've looked at a
number of studies that have investigated
to see whether people are being driven
into homogenized information Bubbles and
it isn't obvious that that's the case
directly although it the polarization
that you're pointing to that you're
concerned about that seems to be clearly
happening so and why that is well that's
a matter of you know intense speculation
I feel like the homogeneity I I feel
like it's not so much this is not
resarch based at all just a total
feeling so I'll admit that but the
feelings that I have is it's not
necessarily that homogeneity has
increased it's that homogenity has
increased as a byproduct of the bubbles
becoming larger so for instance it might
be that I'm from Omaha Nebraska it's a
town in or city really in Nebraska right
it might have been that 50 years ago uh
there are bubbles in living in Omaha and
there are different bubbles for living
in Lincoln and there might be bubbles in
Toronto or neighborhoods in Toronto or
there might be bubbles in Vancouver but
now as the internet exist and Things
become more internationalized these
bubbles are it's not just a bubble that
exists in these cities now the bubbles
have come together and as a result of GM
problem sure yeah or a globalization
problem or a communication problem but
you run into this issue where somebody
might be in a particular city or state
and have a really strong opinion about
what AOC says but they don't know
anything about their local political
scene and I think that that's an issue
because the bubbles have gotten so large
and they're encompassing so many people
now and you're expected to have like a
similar set of beliefs between all of
these different people people now that
might live in totally different places
that's I think a big issue we're running
into yeah well that could be we'll close
with this I think that might be one of
the unintended consequences of
hyperconnectivity sure right is that
we're driving levels of connectivity
that we that get rigid and that we also
can't tolerate yeah all right well
that's a good place to stop um well
thank you very much for coming in today
that's much appreciated and um you're a
sharp debater and and good on your feet
so that's that's fun to see and I do
think that your closing remarks were
correct is
that the the alternative to talking is
fighting MH right so when we stop
talking it's not like the dis
disagreements are going to go away yeah
we will start fighting yeah right
marriages too even talking right
absolutely and talking can be very
painful because a conversation can kill
one of your cherished beliefs and you
will suffer for that although maybe
it'll also help you but the alternative
to that death by offense is death right
yeah right so better to substitute the
abstract argumentation for the actual
physical combat for sure sometimes like
the worst relationships are the ones
where uh where couples fight a lot and
some really bad ones where they don't
fight ever and then all of a sudden the
couples the couples who fight and
reconcile are the ones yes exactly all
right all right well that was good thank
you very much and for everyone watching
and listening on the YouTube platform
thank you very much for your time and
attention and to um we're going to spend
another another half an hour or so on
The Daily wire side so uh if you're
inclined tune in to that and we'll find
out a little bit more about the
background of our current of our current
interviewee Destiny see you later
[Music]
guys